Design pattern creational factory (#429)
Codecademy/docs: content/general/concepts/what-is-the-factory-pattern/what-is-the-factory-pattern.md

## UML Design

![UML diagram of a factory](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Codecademy/docs/main/media/factory-uml.png)

## Example

To illustrate the factory pattern, below provides a real-world example, in Java, depicting potential considerations for a taxi and food delivery booking application. A user of the app will need to send a request for either a standard taxi, a large taxi, a mini bus, or wish to have food delivered from a restaurant. However, before the program understands their needs, the needed request needed remains unknown. When a request object is created, an estimated price is calculated and returned.

Below provides a parent abstract class of a taxi request:

```java
public abstract class TaxiRequest<T> {
  protected T pickUpLocation;
  protected String destination;
  protected double distance;
  protected double estimatedPrice;

  public TaxiRequest(final T pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) {
    this.createTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
  }

  public abstract void createTaxiRequest(final T pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance);

>   // Getters and setters

Reviewer: Some dots or ellipsis here to indicate omitted code.

Author: The only code that is missing here is the getters and setters indicated by the comment. The createTaxiRequest() is stubbed out as its an abstract method. This is just to enforce the sub classes to have a method with the same signature. 

I have resolved, but if I mis understood, please feel free to re-open

}
```

> **Note:** As the `pickUpLocation` property may be an address or a restaurant, generics are used when modeling the `TaxiRequest`. The other property's object types are known.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** As the `pickUpLocation` property may be an address or a restaurant, generics are used when modeling the `TaxiRequest`. The other properties' object types are known.
```

The constructor of `TaxiRequest` calls an abstract method `createTaxiRequest`. This enforces `TaxiRequest`'s subclasses to override the method 

> with instantiation logic. Although the constructors of the subclasses may make use of the abstract super's constructor, instantiation logic remains in the concrete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with instantiation logic. Although the constructors of the subclasses may make use of the abstract super's constructor, instantiation logic remains in the concrete subclass.
```

    super(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
  }

  @Override
  public void createTaxiRequest(String pickUpLocation, String destination, int distance) {
    this.pickUpLocation = pickUpLocation;
    this.destination = destination;
    this.distance = distance;
    this.estimatedPrice = distance * FARE_MULTIPLIER;
    System.out.println("A large taxi is on its way. The estimated fare is £" + estimatedPrice + ".");
  }
}
```

```java
public class MiniBusTaxiRequest extends TaxiRequest<String> {
  private static final double FARE_MULTIPLIER = 3.4;

  public MiniBusTaxiRequest(final String pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) {
    super(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
  }

  @Override
  public void createTaxiRequest(final String pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) {
    this.pickUpLocation = pickUpLocation;
    this.destination = destination;
    this.distance = distance;
    this.estimatedPrice = distance * FARE_MULTIPLIER;
    System.out.println("A minibus is on it's way. The estimated fare is £" + estimatedPrice + ".");
  }
}
```

> As these model classes inherit their properties from the super, they each automatically have `pickUpLocation`, `destination`, and `distance` as fields. The `pickUpLocation` in these cases is an address, and therefore, `pickUpLocation` is of type `String`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As these model classes inherit their properties from the base class, they each automatically have `pickUpLocation`, `destination`, and `distance` as fields. The `pickUpLocation` in these cases is an address, and therefore, `pickUpLocation` is of type `String`.
```

> The constructors for these concrete models, calls `super()` which intern calls the overridden method `createTaxiRequest`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The constructors for these concrete models, calls `super()` which in turn calls the overridden method `createTaxiRequest`.
```

  @Override
  public void createTaxiRequest(Restaurant pickUpLocation, String destination, int distance) {
    this.pickUpLocation = pickUpLocation;
    this.destination = destination;
    this.distance = distance;
    this.foodBill = pickUpLocation.getPrice();
    this.estimatedPrice = distance * FARE_MULTIPLIER + this.foodBill;

    System.out.println("Your food from "
                               + this.pickUpLocation.toString().toLowerCase()
                               + " is on its way! The total bill (including delivery) is £"
                               + this.estimatedPrice
                               + ".");

  }
}
```

The `FoodDeliveryRequest` differs from the other concrete model classes in two important ways. Firstly, the `estimatedPrice` is calculated to include the cost of food from the restaurant, and secondly, the `pickUpLocation` is a restaurant not an address.

Below provides an enum modeling the restaurant choice and its associated price:

```java
public enum Restaurant {
  MCDONALD(5.30),
  KFC(4.99),
  BURGER_KING(8.20),
  DOMINOS(10.99);

  private final double price;

  Restaurant(double price) {
    this.price = price;
  }

  // Getter
}
```

> **Note:** When the restaurant type is chosen, the constructor provides the property `price` with the correct value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note:* When the restaurant type is chosen, the constructor provides the property `price` with the correct value.
```

      case 5: case 6:
        return new SevenSeaterTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      default:
        return new MiniBusTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
    }
  }

  // Creates taxi request based on TaxiType
  public static TaxiRequest<?> getTaxiRequest(final TaxiType taxiType, final String pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) throws Exception {
    switch (taxiType) {
      case STANDARD_TAXI:
        return new StandardTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      case SEVEN_SEATER:
        return new SevenSeaterTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      case MINI_BUS:
        return new MiniBusTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      default:
        throw new IllegalArgumentException("TaxiType " + taxiType + " not recognised");
    }
  }
}
```

The factory method `getTaxiRequest()` has been overloaded using four different signatures.

The first `getTaxiRequest(String, String int)` that returns a `StandardTaxiRequest` object as the `pickUpLocation` is of type `String` and both 
`numberOfPassingers` and `TaxiType` have been negated from the method call.

> The second `getTaxiRequest(Resteraunt, String, int)` that returns a `FoodDeliveryRequest` object as the `pickUpLocation` is of type `Restaurant`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second `getTaxiRequest(Restaurant, String, int)` that returns a `FoodDeliveryRequest` object as the `pickUpLocation` is of type `Restaurant`.
```

---

> Title: 'What is the Factory Pattern?'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Title: 'Factory Pattern'
```

Structure change for Docs and present/future contributions. 🟡

Description: 'The factory pattern defers instantiation logic of a parent abstract class to its concrete sub-classes.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Interview Prep'
Tags:
  - 'Classes'
  - 'Conceptual'
  - 'Constructors'
  - 'Objects'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

The _factory pattern_ defers instantiation logic of a parent abstract class to its concrete sub-classes. At time of object creation, the specific class type may not be known, in which a creator class' factory method is used to decouple this identifying logic. This is typically done through the methods parameters and a switch statement.

## UML Design

> ![UML diagram of a factory](/media/factory-uml.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![UML diagram of a factory](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Codecademy/docs/main/media/factory-uml.png)
```

Author: It might be an idea to put this URL in a readme. 

Apologies if I missed it

## Example

To illustrate the _factory pattern_, below provides a real world example, in Java, depicting potential considerations for a taxi and food delivery booking application. A user of the app will need to send a request for either a standard taxi, a large taxi, a mini bus or wish to have food delivered from a restaurant, however before the program understands their needs, which of the above requests needed remains unknown. When a request object is created, an estimated price is calculated and returned.

Below provides a parent abstract class of a taxi request:

```java
public abstract class TaxiRequest<T> {
  protected T pickUpLocation;
  protected String destination;
  protected double distance;
  protected double estimatedPrice;

  public TaxiRequest(final T pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) {
    this.createTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
  }

  public abstract void createTaxiRequest(final T pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance);

> 
> 
>   // getters and setters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

  // Getters and setters
```

}
```

> **Note:** As the `pickUpLocation` property may be an address or a restaurant, we have made use of generics when modeling the `TaxiRequest`. The other property's object types are known.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note:** As the `pickUpLocation` property may be an address or a restaurant, generics are used when modeling the `TaxiRequest`. The other property's object types are known.
```

> The constructor of `TaxiRequest` calls an abstract method `createTaxtRequest`. This enforces `TaxiRequest`'s subclasses to override the method with instantiation logic. Although the constructors of the subclasses may make use of the abstract super's constructor, instantiation logic remains in the concrete.

Author: You cant remove 'in the' here as the meaning is different. We have a (in essence) 2 taxi request classes, one abstract and one concrete. The createTaxiRequest provides instantiation logic in the concrete class, and this is enforced by the same method name in the abstract class. Removing the 'in the' would mean that the method's logic is concrete. What we are saying is the method's logic lives in the concrete class (and not the abstract.)

> The constructor of `TaxiRequest` calls an abstract method `createTaxtRequest`. This enforces `TaxiRequest`'s subclasses to override the method with instantiation logic. Although the constructors of the subclasses may make use of the abstract super's constructor, instantiation logic remains in the concrete.

Reviewer 2: Could we then just append the word "class" so it reads "instantiation logic remains in the concrete class."

Thanks for the clarification! It makes much more sense that the method's logic is in the concrete class rather than the method's logic being concrete.

> Below provides the concrete subclasses of `StandardTaxtRequest`, `SevenSeaterTaxiRequest` and `MiniBusTaxiRequest` that all extend the abstract class above, `TaxiRequest`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below provides the concrete subclasses of `StandardTaxiRequest`, `SevenSeaterTaxiRequest`, and `MiniBusTaxiRequest` that all extend the abstract `TaxiRequest` class above:
```

    System.out.println("A large taxi is on its way. The estimated fare is £" + estimatedPrice + ".");
  }
}
```

```java
public class MiniBusTaxiRequest extends TaxiRequest<String>
{
  private static final double FARE_MULTIPLIER = 3.4;

  public MiniBusTaxiRequest(final String pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) {
    super(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
  }

  @Override
  public void createTaxiRequest(final String pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) {
    this.pickUpLocation = pickUpLocation;
    this.destination = destination;
    this.distance = distance;
    this.estimatedPrice = distance * FARE_MULTIPLIER;
    System.out.println("A minibus is on it's way. The estimated fare is £" + estimatedPrice + ".");
  }
}
```

As these model classes inherit their properties from the super, they each automatically have `pickUpLocation`, `destination`, and `distance` as fields. The `pickUpLocation` in these cases is an address, and therefore, `pickUpLocation` is of type `String`.

The constructors for these concrete models, calls `super()` which intern calls the overridden method `createTaxiRequest`.

> The overridden method `createTaxtRequest()` handles the instantiation logic of the class. The properties `pickUpLocation`, `destination`, and`distance` are set, with the `estimatedPrice` programmatically calculated using the static property `FARE_MULTIPLIER`. A print statement has been added to help illustrated the pattern.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The overridden method `createTaxiRequest()` handles the instantiation logic of the class. The properties `pickUpLocation`, `destination`, and `distance` are set, with the `estimatedPrice` programmatically calculated using the static property `FARE_MULTIPLIER`. A print statement has been added to help illustrate the pattern.
```

  private double foodBill;

  public FoodDeliveryRequest(Restaurant pickUpLocation, String destination, int distance)
  {
    super(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
  }

  @Override
  public void createTaxiRequest(Restaurant pickUpLocation, String destination, int distance)
  {
    this.pickUpLocation = pickUpLocation;
    this.destination = destination;
    this.distance = distance;
    this.foodBill = pickUpLocation.getPrice();
    this.estimatedPrice = distance * FARE_MULTIPLIER + this.foodBill;

    System.out.println("Your food from "
                               + this.pickUpLocation.toString().toLowerCase()
                               + " is on its way! The total bill (including delivery) is £"
                               + this.estimatedPrice
                               + ".");

  }
}
```

The `FoodDeliveryRequest` differs from the other concrete model classes in two important ways. Firstly, the `estimatedPrice` is calculated to include the cost of food from the restaurant, and secondly, the `pickUpLocation` is a restaurant not an address.

Below provides an enum modeling the restaurant choice and its associated price:

```java
public enum Restaurant
{

>   MACDONALD(5.30),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  MCDONALD(5.30),
```

  KFC(4.99),
  BURGER_KING(8.20),
  DOMINOS(10.99);

  private final double price;

>   Restaurant(double price)
>   {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Restaurant(double price) {
```

    }

    switch (numOfPassengers) {
      case 1: case 2: case 3: case 4 :
        return new StandardTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      case 5: case 6:
        return new SevenSeaterTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      default:
        return new MiniBusTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
    }
  }

  // Creates taxi request based on TaxiType
  public static TaxiRequest<?> getTaxiRequest(final TaxiType taxiType, final String pickUpLocation, final String destination, final int distance) throws Exception {
    switch (taxiType) {
      case STANDARD_TAXI:
        return new StandardTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      case SEVEN_SEATER:
        return new SevenSeaterTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      case MINI_BUS:
        return new MiniBusTaxiRequest(pickUpLocation, destination, distance);
      default:
        throw new IllegalArgumentException("TaxiType " + taxiType + " not recognised");
    }
  }
}
```

The factory method `getTaxiRequest()` has been overloaded using four different signatures.

> The first (`getTaxiRequest(String, String int)`) returns a `StandardTaxiRequest` object as the `pickUpLocation` is of type `String` and both `numberOfPassingers` and `TaxiType` have been negated from the method call.
> 
> The second (`getTaxiRequest(Resteraunt, String, int)`) returns a `FoodDeliveryRequest` object as the `pickUpLocation` is of type `Restaurant`.
> 
> The third (`getTaxiRequest(int, String, String, int)`) returns a taxi request based on the number of passengers provided and determined by a switch statement. Should the number of passengers exceed or fall below the required amount an exception is thrown.
> 
> Finally, the fourth (`getTaxiRequest(TaxiType, String, String, int)`) returns a taxi request based on the `TaxiType` specified and determined by a switch statement. Should the `TaxiType` not be recognised, an exception is thrown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first `getTaxiRequest(String, String int)` that returns a `StandardTaxiRequest` object as the `pickUpLocation` is of type `String` and both `numberOfPassingers` and `TaxiType` have been negated from the method call.

The second `getTaxiRequest(Resteraunt, String, int)` that returns a `FoodDeliveryRequest` object as the `pickUpLocation` is of type `Restaurant`.

The third `getTaxiRequest(int, String, String, int)` that returns a taxi request is based on the number of passengers provided and is determined by a switch statement. Should the number of passengers exceed or fall below the required amount, an exception is thrown.

Finally, the fourth `getTaxiRequest(TaxiType, String, String, int)` that returns a taxi request based on the `TaxiType` is specified and determined by a switch statement. Should the `TaxiType` not be recognized, an exception is thrown.
```

Below provides the enum `TaxiType` for requesting a specific taxi:

```java
public enum TaxiType
{
  STANDARD_TAXI,
  SEVEN_SEATER,
  MINI_BUS
}
```

The `Main` class below, starts the program and acts as the client in this example. It asks the creator to instantiate different taxi request objects by calling the overloaded methods. The print statement in each of the model classes should be outputted to the console respectively.

```java
public class Main {

  public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
    System.out.print("Standard taxi (default) - ");
    TaxiCreator.getTaxiRequest("1 Charming Av", "49 GoodFeeling Ln", 5);

    System.out.print("Food Delivery (Restaurant) - ");

>     TaxiCreator.getTaxiRequest(Restaurant.MACDONALD,"49 GoodFeeling Ln", 5);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    TaxiCreator.getTaxiRequest(Restaurant.MCDONALD,"49 GoodFeeling Ln", 5);
```
